Documentation on Adding New Languages to Stylus (#579)
OffchainLabs/arbitrum-docs: arbitrum-docs/stylus/how-tos/adding-support-for-new-languages.mdx

---

> title: 'Adding Stylus support for new programming languages'

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: 'How to add a new programming language to Stylus'
```

> sidebar_label: 'Adding support for new programming languages'

Reviewer: ```suggestion
sidebar_label: 'Add a new programming language'
```

Reviewer: weakly held suggestion -> removing precision in favor of tight sidebar title & page title; the intro of the body sets the stage more precisely

> description: 'A guide on adding support for more programming languages to Stylus'

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: 'Stylus shipped with native support for Rust and C, but you can add support for any programming language that compiles to WebAssembly. This how-to walks you through the process of extending Stylus with Zig support, allowing you to write EVM-compatible Zig smart contracts.'
```

Reviewer: meta -> `description` is what appears in search & impacts SEO, so we can have some fun targeting specific keywords and phrases, making it inviting, etc. Not sure if we're comfortable saying "extending", nits welcome :)

```

This is enough for us to deploy on the Stylus testnet! We'll use the [Stylus CLI tool](https://github.com/OffchainLabs/cargo-stylus), which you installed earlier using `cargo install cargo-stylus`:

```
cargo stylus deploy --private-key=<YOUR_TESTNET_PRIVKEY> --wasm-file-path=main.wasm
```

The tool will send two transactions: one to deploy your Zig contract's code onchain, and the other to activate it for usage.

```
Uncompressed WASM size: 112 B
Compressed WASM size to be deployed onchain: 103 B
```

You can see that our Zig program is _tiny_ when compiled to WASM. Next, we can call our contract to make sure it works using any of your favorite Ethereum tooling. In this example below, we use the `cast` CLI tool provided by [foundry](https://github.com/foundry-rs/foundry). The contract above has been deployed to the Stylus testnet at address `0xe0CD04EA8c148C9a5A58Fee1C895bc2cf6896799`.

```
export ADDR=0xe0CD04EA8c148C9a5A58Fee1C895bc2cf6896799
cast call --rpc-url 'https://stylus-testnet.arbitrum.io/rpc' $ADDR '0x'
```

Calling the contract via RPC should simply return the value `0` as we programmed it to.

```
0x
```

> ### Reading Input and Writing Output Data

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Reading input and writing output data
```

You can find this file under `WasmAllocator.zig` in the OffchainLabs/zig-on-stylus repository. We can now use it:

```c
const std = @import("std");
const WasmAllocator = @import("WasmAllocator.zig");

// Uses our custom WasmAllocator which is a simple modification over the wasm allocator
// from the Zig standard library as of Zig 0.11.0.
pub const allocator = std.mem.Allocator{
    .ptr = undefined,
    .vtable = &WasmAllocator.vtable,
};
```

Building again and running `cargo stylus check` should now succeed:

```bash
Uncompressed WASM size: 514 B
Compressed WASM size to be deployed onchain: 341 B
Connecting to Stylus RPC endpoint: https://stylus-testnet.arbitrum.io/rpc
Stylus program with same WASM code is already activated onchain
```

Let's deploy it:

```
cargo stylus deploy --private-key=<YOUR_TESTNET_PRIVKEY> --wasm-file-path=main.wasm
```

Now if we try to call it, it will output whatever input we send it, like an echo. Let's send it the input 0x123456:

```
export ADDR=0x20Aa65a9D3F077293993150C0345f62B50CCb549
cast call --rpc-url 'https://stylus-testnet.arbitrum.io/rpc' $ADDR '0x123456'

0x123456
```

Works!

> ## Prime Number Checker Implementation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Prime number checker implementation
```

        out[0] = 0;
    }
    output(out);
    return 0;
}
```

Let's check and deploy it:

```
Uncompressed WASM size: 10.8 KB
Compressed WASM size to be deployed onchain: 525 B
```

Our uncompressed size is big because of that giant array of booleans, but the program is highly compressible because all of them are zeros!

An instance of this program has been deployed to the Stylus testnet at address `0x0c503Bb757b1CaaD0140e8a2700333C0C9962FE4`

## Interacting With Stylus Programs Using Ethers-rs

An example is included in this repo under `rust-example` which uses the popular [ethers-rs](https://github.com/gakonst/ethers-rs) library to interact with our prime sieve contract on the Stylus testnet. To run it, do:

```
export STYLUS_PROGRAM_ADDRESS=0x0c503Bb757b1CaaD0140e8a2700333C0C9962FE4
cargo run
```

...and see:

```
Checking if 2 is_prime = true, took: 404.146917ms
Checking if 3 is_prime = true, took: 154.802083ms
Checking if 4 is_prime = false, took: 123.239583ms
Checking if 5 is_prime = true, took: 109.248709ms
Checking if 6 is_prime = false, took: 113.086625ms
Checking if 32 is_prime = false, took: 280.19975ms
Checking if 53 is_prime = true, took: 123.667958ms
```

> ## Where to Go from Here

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Next steps
```

A (provisional) convention
